### CALM

<!-- P, ID: 050166 -->

You’ve spent most of your life in sedentary pursuits—books, movies, hobbies, and so on—rather than active ones. You’re well versed in all manner of academia or other intellectual pursuits, but nothing physical. You’re not weak or feeble, necessarily (although this is a good descriptor for characters who are elderly), but you have no experience in more physical activities.

<!-- H, ID: 050167 -->

> Calm is a great descriptor for characters who never intended to have adventures but were thrust into them, a trope that occurs often in modern games and particularly in horror games.

<!-- P, ID: 050169 -->

You gain the following characteristics:

<!-- P, ID: 050170 -->

**Bookish:** +2 to your Intellect Pool.

<!-- P, ID: 050171 -->

**Skills:** You are trained in four nonphysical skills of your choice.

<!-- P, ID: 050172 -->

**Trivia:** You can come up with a random fact pertinent to the current situation when you wish it. This is always a matter of fact, not conjecture or supposition, and must be something you could have logically read or seen in the past. You can do this one time, although the ability is renewed each time you make a recovery roll.

<!-- P, ID: 050173 -->

**Inability:** You’re just not a fighter. All physical attacks are hindered.

<!-- P, ID: 050174 -->

**Inability:** You’re not the outdoorsy type. All climbing, running, jumping, and swimming tasks are hindered.

<!-- P, ID: 050175 -->

**Initial Link to the Starting Adventure:** From the following list of options, choose how you became involved in the first adventure.

<!-- L, ID: 050176 -->

1. You read about the current situation somewhere and decided to check it out for yourself.
2. You were in the right (wrong?) place at the right (wrong?) time.
3. While avoiding an entirely different situation, you walked into your current situation.
4. One of the other PCs dragged you into it.

<!-- /L -->

